[Music]
so many examples of drug traffickers the
CI gets involved that we're Mystik you
know CIA plug these on the door CIA
interruptions or just go together
now drug traffickers we go together I
was thinking more like that is possible
because I don't think of sum up yeah I
could have really understood what the
math impact of LSD would be that's
Martin Lee and this is alternative radio
this edition of a are features Martin
Lee on the CIA and LSD acid dreams
during the Cold War in the early 1950s
the US Central Intelligence Agency
experimented and developed LSD as a
mind-control espionage weapon it
launched a massive covert program in
which countless innocent civilians were
used as guinea pigs though the CIA was
intent on keeping the drug for its own
purposes it could not prevent it from
spreading into the popular culture
resulting in major social consequences
Martin Lee is an award-winning
journalist and author his classic book
on the CIA and LSD is entitled acid
dreams he spoke in Menlo Park California
as you know of course the Summer of Love
in haight-ashbury district of San
Francisco that was a time when they say
whole psychedelic scene emerged with
such intensity that a captured worldwide
attention that year by and the drug
experience and LSD in particular was
certainly a central part of what was
happening in haight-ashbury in San
Francisco during that period I think a
lot of people who are devotees of acid
as it was called or it's cool
no thought and we spent that time is
somehow a ticket that would send
everybody gliding into the Age of
Aquarius and these people I doubt had
any inkling that the CIA and the US
military were heavily involved at the
same drug but for a very very different
purpose
and that really gets to the crux of the
ironic nature of the LSD story that one
group of people in the 60s or millions
of people in fact embrace the drug in
the sacrament as a mind-expanding drug
when 10-15 years earlier the CIA and the
army were investigating the same drug as
an instrument of warfare clandestine
warfare not as a mining expects mind
expanding drug but as a mind control
drug not as a sacrament but as a weapon
and I think the LSD story is a story
that abounds with all sorts of ironies
but that is the central irony so what
I'm going to do in this discussion is
talk about how the CIA in the Army got
into experimenting with LSD and other
drugs
what they were looking for when they
first got their hands on LSD what
happened when they began to experiment
with it what happened when they start
taking it themselves the CIA agents the
people in the Army how they eventually
used it in operational context both
there's a chemical warfare weapon except
the army did and that's a
cloak-and-dagger
weapon at the CIA used it so as anyone
who knows about LSD you know knows the
story how it begins at the fairly
familiar wine with the chemist dr.
Albert Hoffman was working in Swiss
pharmaceutical firm Sandoz when he
developed lsd-25 was the 25th variation
of a molecule or a compound he was
working on so called that LSB 25 that
was in 1938 basically just sat on the
shelf he didn't really know what he had
created then five years later he
accidentally absorbed some of the drug
through his fingertips and he had the
first LSD trip that anyone has ever
taken and it was a very powerful
experience it's in April 1943 and he
ended up writing about it and at that
time World War two was going on in the
CIA's wartime predecessor the Office of
Strategic Services was already involved
in its own drug testing program
they were looking for a truth seer a
truth drug they can use in an
interrogation context to get information
from enemies from suspected double
agents from what having anybody they
wanted to get information from and what
is when we did that information that's
why the OSS was trying to develop a
truth job and they tested a whole bunch
of different drugs starting in 1942 and
the one interestingly enough that they
decided was the most suitable for
loosening a person's tongue and getting
information against their will
was of all things marijuana and they
developed an extract of marijuana which
they would inject in a cigarettes or
like a gooey substance they put it in a
tobacco cigarette or they put it in food
or they put him different things to get
into a person system and then this would
relax the person or whatever get them to
talk this is little bit that LS has
concluded that marijuana was the best
known truth substance to drug available
at the time and this was for me once
classified US intelligence memory and an
OSS report I read through that 20,000
pages of these pages pertaining to the
drug programs of the CIA in the army and
other military agencies this was out
what they call PD which is a rather
transparent sort of codename for true
stub this was how they described
marijuana back in the World War II
period and I'm quoting out TV appears to
relax oil additions and to deaden the
areas of the brain which govern
individuals discretion in caution
accentuates the senses and make manifest
any strong characteristics of the
individual sexual inhibitions are
lowered and expensive humour is
accentuated to the point where any state
and our situation can become extremely
funny to the subject on the other hand a
person's unpleasant characteristics may
also be heightened and they distorted
that generally speaking the reaction
will be one of great requested II and
hilarity I think it's actually rather
accurate descriptions of the marijuana
experience and the RL so brings
interesting one of the things that one
of the people who sat on the committee
that oversaw there's
experiment which they develop or came to
the conclusion that marijuana was the
truth drug was the head of the federal
narcotics dealer Harry Anslinger who is
going around promoting the reform and
this idea that you smoke a joint you'll
kill your brother and it's a very
different image of what I wanted us to
you then what secretly Angela knew that
the OSS men concluded as a playful that
makes you laugh lowers your inhibitions
is kind of I'm eventually the OSS
realized that marijuana really lived the
perfect ruse here and by any means and
they've concluded in one of their memos
at the end of the war when there was
something up the program I'm quoting
again which is about TD the drug defies
all but the most expert and searching
analysis and for all practical purposes
can be considered beyond analysis that's
what that had the thing about marijuana
now in after World War Two the CIA
picked up where the elephants had left
off and they continued this search for
the perfect truth drug and the CIA
basically looked at any interrogation in
which a drug was employed to get
information from somebody they refer to
that as a special interrogation or an
unorthodox interrogation at any
interrogation work any kind of anything
was utilized to assist the interrogation
above and beyond just verbal
manipulation that was a special
interrogation and during the late
forties the CIA developed two special
interrogation techniques that they were
using fairly frequently in interrogation
so one involved administering to a
person a kind of a downer a soap eristic
someone to something to you know kind of
flow love them was not to sleep which is
sort of loosening up and then the CIA
would try to have that person hippin
type in that condition novel hypnosis
was the first example of first kind of
special interrogation technique and the
other special entire American care
Gatien technical that didn't work was to
give a person a barbiturate
literally to hook a person up with two
IVs one in either arm one would have our
bub issue it and eclipse which toe which
would go into the system the person
would fall asleep and then they'd have
the other ID and instead of me upper
when they'd switch that on to bring the
person out from the unconscious state
and they wanted to get the person just
at the point where they were just coming
to just in the groggy condition coming
out of unconsciousness just beginning to
be wakeful but not really wakeful and
getting this what they call the twilight
zone or talking zone this sort of
semi-conscious state try to keep a
person in this condition by sort of you
know administering these drugs and
either arm so this condition was gamed a
optimum as far as the CIA was concerned
to getting a person to talk and to say
things that they might others not mine
not otherwise saying they were you know
being interrogated now as you can
imagine it was a rather crude technique
it was difficult to regulate exact low
of the drugs and they were getting some
positive results as far as they was
concerned from either from both of these
special interrogation techniques but
neither provides surefire results
because of that the CIA kept looking
again for that perfect truth serum it
became an obsession and in 1951 at least
that's the earliest I was able to indict
up to to identify the CIA began to
experiment with LSD as a part of what
was called project artichoke
I was the code name for the program and
that was being run by a unit within the
CIA called the cost of security at that
time was inspection security staff it
became the office of security the unit
within the CIA responsible for the
security of very CIA installations and
buildings and one thing they had to was
protect against infiltration as part of
the early mandate so they were looking
at different interrogation techniques
for this purpose to me they got their
hands on LSD now LSD had first come to
the United States in 1949 which brought
over from Switzerland or sand Oasis
making the drug available to scientists
and researchers who were studying how
the mind works and so forth and fellow
men dr. max Rinku who is based in Boston
associated with Harvard University he
brought the drug Aldous the first time
to the United States in 1940 diamond he
ended up being employed by the CIA
indirectly he was funded by the CIA
through different conduits to do LSD
research for them but that was still a
few years later so it's 1951 to see I
began to experiment
LSD and initially they think and they
really get blown away by this and they
think god this can really be the drug we
were looking for it seems to have very
promising results for them they start
referring to it as the truth drug they
were looking for and it seems to not
only make people bill the beans but
there's a hard time remember exactly
what happened while they're under the
influence of the drugs that oh well
that's perfect Gannicus Philippines and
not even remember they spill the beans
more than they could have ever hoped for
and the memorandum during this period
1951-52 within the office of security is
like we finally found it we've got the
holy grail of the cloak-and-dagger trade
that's going to unlock the human mind
and we can get the information you want
on this back wheel and had rather naive
view of it but they were very very
excited about LSD but when more reports
started coming in you know oral health
during this first year of research now
they began to get some conflicting
single signals and contradictory court
reports some reports indicated that LSD
seemed to make people so confused that
they were getting garbled information
from people it wasn't accurate and this
gave rise to the idea well it's not a
truth serum well maybe it's sort of like
a lie serum maybe it would maybe if you
gave it to it enemy if you gave it to
your own agents to have instead of like
a suicide pill they would have an LSD Co
with them and they're going overseas on
a mission they get caught by the enemy
the Soviets and interrogating a CIA
agent like if somehow populist LSD fill
without the Soviet they would be
guaranteed to give nonsensical
information or don't equally that's how
they were beginning to talk about it at
the same time some are saying this is
the truth drugs other than saying no
this is this interesting kind of lies
here and it underscores this how
contains they were about LSD but
something interesting happen every drug
that became later popular on the street
and the 1916 from heroin cocaine
mescaline magic mushrooms all these
things the CIA nominee were looking at
10 years early very intensely all of
them bomb not became popular later as
street drugs usually what happened is
the CIA test the drug they assess its
implications in terms of interrogations
usefulness if it's useful they use it if
not they put it on the shelf they go
onto something else with LSD
it didn't happen that way you know I
started listening if I think it's useful
then they realize it's not really quite
the way they wanted it to be as a truth
drug but instead of putting it on the
shelf and moving on they sort of did a
double peg because whereas the drug
liquor was so powerful the most powerful
mind drug known to science at the time
odorless colorless tasteless meaning
unlike it some drugs to put in a
person's drink and it's a bitter flavor
you know you know when you're drinking
you something's going on LSD no one
could know that when you have known only
one someone was putting in your system
against your will and it seemed to
harbor soms often potential for
cloak-and-dagger purposes that they
didn't understand what it was really so
rather than just sort of not brilliant
head lavage is that okay if it's not a
truth drug again what music and happily
use it and they involved in a very
intensive period of examinations the
drug and it took two forms there was out
of health studies contract studies where
they would fund scientists psychiatrists
who were already themselves beginning to
work with LSD and mescaline and other
hallucinogenic drugs the CIA stepped in
at a very early phase and only well as a
small number of scientists were doing
this and they began to fund their
research sometimes the people getting
this funding didn't even know was coming
from the CIA because the thing I had a
lot of questions that had more or less
legitimate you know medical purposes to
these questions was there an antidote
for LSD they wanted to know could you
kill someone with it coming in would you
could you overdose turns out you cannot
physically overdose from LSD although
you can psychologically overdose you
cannot stupid it doesn't stupidly kill
you you know but then they have these
system you know very fundamental what
happens we mix it with another drop what
happens when you could do this in that
we could can you combine it with other
mind-control techniques like hypnosis
and so forth so they funded these
outside scientists to look into these
sorts of questions which were more or
less legitimate questions from the point
of view of medical science at the same
time the CIA was also pursuing its own
studies in hats
I want to talk about both of these in
terms of the out of house the contracts
place some of us got into some pretty
dicey areas for example the CIA and the
US Army were financing the work of dr.
Paul Hoch
who was the head of the New York State
Psychiatric Institute in New York City
and he very early on was doing things
like giving people LSD and mescaline
sometimes to a Magister are a new
creation but injecting LSD straight into
the spinal cord keep doing things like
giving people a LSD and then applying
electroshock therapy while they're on
under the influence of LSD isn't I'm not
a horrible thing to say go
the grey list of what he was doing was
giving people LSD lobotomizing them
sometimes we're still under the
influence of LSD mescaline and then
after the operation we could to later
give them psychedelic or to listen Janet
drug again to compare the effects before
or after and all these things were being
described in the reports that dr. Hogue
is writing up and he's getting funded by
the CIA and army I think he was written
aware was confronted in addition to some
of the work of the Hulk was doing the
CIA and the army were also funding felon
and dr. he Edward Heath in the what New
Orleans or the Polish down there he was
doing things like giving people LSD
while have electrodes implanted into
their brain and then stimulating the
electrodes to see what kind of
sensations or experiences a person will
have another example just some of the
Girish stories here from that CIA
document but some of the work that was
going on at Lexington narcotic posture
during the 1960's this is in lexington
kentucky and ostensibly the place where
heroin addicts would go when they wanted
to shake their habit they wanted to try
to get off the drug they were checking
to Lexington into the addiction research
center their detox and so forth
but the word got out on the street that
if you want to get heroin if the supply
was short on the street you were having
a hard time scoring you could volunteer
check into Lexington and offer yourself
as a guinea pig for these wacky drug
experiments that were going on there
where people were being paid for their
participation junkies in heroin in
morphine if they would allow themselves
to be experimented on with I didn't know
what the drugs really were but they
would turn out to be a lasting of
psilocybin stew exactly being the
extract of the magic mushroom is a
synthetic extract and this was going on
like William Burroughs the novelist
wrote Naked Lunch who died recently
great novelist and eighteen writer he
himself checked into Lexington narcotics
at one point he was a heroin addict and
he told him tell me about these things
directly so one of the things they were
doing at Lexington needs experiments
were being run by dr. Harris in Bell who
was the winner in your sibian of CIA
funds and later a big muckety-muck
within the FDA and the NIH NIH measuring
student mental health connection because
health in the Washington area sort of
the government medical bureaucracy he
was giving people LSD sometimes for
77270 days straight and increasing the
doses massively because with LSD the way
it works is a very high threshold
tolerance level so that if a person
takes it one day you have to get in my
twice we both the next day for them to
have an experience because ordinarily it
would be very difficult to have an
experience again but the scene goes that
you wouldn't work but you know exactly
the drug works so they were getting
people massive doses for weeks on end
and invariably these were African
American our game tapes were being used
in these experiments so while all this
was going on that's just an example of
some of this some of the fine
scientific work that the CIA which
funding the CIA is also experimenting
you know in-house not going to court in
the Corvette people scientist but
experimenting themselves there are many
on themselves in fact
because we have a surf the intuition
that if they look at ever figure out how
to use this drug in a cloak-and-dagger
context if we're going to use
operationally most likely he would be
used in a way that were a person who was
getting it been giving the drug would
not realize it would be sort of a
surprise share officious administration
so given with that fear I realized that
this was the direction they were going
to be moving in the Heller sort of step
by step years of text where they got to
the point where very first experimenting
on each other and then they eventually
started giving it the unwitting American
citizens you know randomly who were
being targeted and isn't how it work but
mainly working with CI incidentally I
was taking a lead now by 1953 was not
the office of security it was sort of a
rival unit within the CIA called the
Technical Services staff and they ran
was called the MKULTRA program which was
the main drug and mind-control expanded
research program at the CIA pursued
during the Cold War within in Kaltura
there was one hundred and forty nine
different sub projects within this Delta
project and the technical church has
security equipment services staff to
administer this tremendous now as the
name implies what they what they're well
within the CIA and was not a only a half
a dozen people in the early going it's
part of the here it grew to about a
dozen people cannot by the end of the
nineteen fifties they would supply
technical support for CIA operations in
the field of the CIA needed like you
know a poison pain or drunken their life
was invisible like you know sort of spy
gadget the technical service they would
come up with these things create them
and your James Bond type of scenario
right well maybe was more like get smart
I don't know but and so one way they
were very interested with LSD
I mean they were plunging this whole hog
eventually the baby came the principal
unit was in this scenario looking into
the through that four or five other
units within the CIA as well that was
interested in galaxies but Technical
Services look
what they did was firstly decided among
themselves half dozen or so people they
are going to give it to each other and
all trying to draw connect it and they
decided among himself but they were
springing on each other without
forewarning when they did that again in
the early stages as soon as the person
you know drank a morning coffee at the
CIA and then the buddy would said oh by
the way we got it so prepared to take
the day off you're going to have some
LSD experience and then a female in
Mexico would slip it into the coffee but
they wouldn't tell someone within their
own unit now that they had got it
and then they fell doing something
similar for other people within the CIA
outside group from director that got to
the point where they began to target
unwitting American citizens and testing
on that person who oversaw these
experiments where unwitting Americans
were being targeted on an experimental
basis was the high-ranking Clairol
bureau of narcotics agent named George
hunter white he was sort of on loan or
working kind of double duty for the the
narcs on the one here and for the CIA by
day he was going around busting drug
dealers at night he was involved in an
operation called midnight climax where
in drug-addicted prostitutes that white
employed would lure customers unlucky
customer to turn out to a CIA safe house
in New York City initially and then in
the San Francisco Bay Area there was a
couple as well and this so fast would be
decorated as a bordello the whorehouse
essentially and white would sit behind
the mirrors that couldn't be seen on the
other side and watch what was going on
- when yours and he'd washes the
prostitutes with slip LSD into the
drinks of their customers and I mean we
do their thing and then sometimes people
you know once the drug took effect which
usually takes about 45 minutes or an
hour some of them got so scared that
they just ran out into the night and no
one ever knew what happened with these
people in others stayed whatnot and
sometimes they were filmed and basically
life was recording information take
notes he referred to the drug intimately
as stormy was his code name which is
sort of indicative of ethics
people are having sort of rough trips
doesn't work and he would give this
information to his colleagues at the CIA
in the Technical Services staff so this
has been my climax at the same time this
was going on the people in technical
services were continuing the in-house
experimentation and it got to the point
because of the rivalry and some of the
other units in the CI who were working
with LSD conduct jealous that Technical
Services getting more than money
particularly the office of security the
first one that got in here so the
ultimate security assigned someone to
spy on Technical Services and find out
everything they were dealing with LSD
and - there should win they discovered
that the Technical Services staff with
planning to put LSD in the punch served
its annual CIA Christmas office party in
1954 and was actual document to this
effect it's grabbing with them
recommending how that not happen but an
underscore should sort of how crazy
things were getting down of CIA clerks
there was that loose you know in a lot
of CIA agents were taking LSD whether
you know volunteering or not one at one
point that would North interesting about
this Christmas caper it was ten years
later that Ken Kesey and the Merry
Pranksters in this area in California
sort of holding their electric kool-aid
acid test where they were putting LSD in
the punch I mean having these wild acid
rock parties and again it's one of those
irony's that the CIA was really the
first to do this was electrifying the
punch and then later on became sort of
across celebra almost you know for the
for the nascent counterculture in the
60s CIA had an idea that it might be
useful for their own aging so they were
sending unity of operationally into
dangerous missions if they were made
familiar with the LSD experience before
they were sent on a mission because
again if they were captured and it
turned out that the Communist Chinese
and their North Koreans or the Russians
or whoever might be the enemy in this
case dosed their agent with LSD to
interrogate them if their agent was
already familiar with the effects of the
and they call such agents enlightened
operatives that's how the CIA member
annek refers to them which would have
sure tickled committee Larry's fancy to
the call such people had taken LSD he is
enlightened the idea was that if they
were familiar with the experience they'd
be less likely to be manipulated if they
were given the drug show efficacy by the
Soviets or they would realize at least
that it was a temporary experience last
ten or twelve hours nothing lasts
forever and you know they would they
could hold their own they could resist
an interrogator and there was some
discussion of using LSD to look like a
mind-control vaccine it has it worked
and the what happened it was a very
interesting series of memos that I read
through an early 50s till now where
something called the project committee
wherein representatives from each of the
units within the CIA involved with LSD
even medical office and somebody
counterintelligence in somebody Office
of Scientific intelligence of the
security technical service only we all
got together they were that they would
sort of compare notes or these some
things they would say and share some of
their information and at one point the
representative for the CIA's medical
office suggests that LSD be given to all
male trainee volunteers and when someone
else suggests worldwide just all male
training volunteers why not all
components of the agency should have
this available to them and then the
project committee is the myth the memo
said verbally concurred in this
recommendation so it means that a lot of
CIA agents who are experimenting with
LSD are experiencing LSD in the early
end in 1950 and the obvious question is
well what did this do to them I mean I
wouldn't make them grow long hair and
put on love beads and standards and go
you know Marcia John hates tree we know
we're talking ten years early anyway but
you know what did he think of that and
it seems that if it's look very
interesting because I looked at those
documents I saw well something very
felony happens you know in the earlier
billing the whole focus is on speech
inducing interrogation getting
information using drugs
almost solely for that purpose and then
they you can't LSD and they go through
this intense turmoil for about 80
months all of a sudden they're talking
about using drugs for 50 different
things as omens if LSD catalyzed their
spine lives now and sort of made them
think more creatively about what they
could do with drugs so I saw there's an
example one of the documents that our
access to the Freedom of Information Act
this is from May 5th 1955 and this is an
MKULTRA document and it's a document
that refers to sub-project 35 again the
45th of the sub-project of the 149 and
this particular research was conducted
at the Georgetown University medical
facility in Washington DC and what it
lists is 17 different materials or all
kinds of substances they're looking for
to do to be 17 different things again
speech inducing is just one thing now
among many and I don't need all 17 but
I'll just read a few to give you a sense
so the directions they were going what
was the substances which would promote
the logical thinking and impulsiveness
to the point where the recipient would
be discredited in public
indeed LSD was eventually used that way
operation such as substances which
increase the efficiency of mentation and
perception meaning making three people
smarter or more alert for materials
which will prevent a counteract the
intoxicating effect of alcohol and the
fourth is one that will promote or
exaggerate the intoxicating effect of
alcohol and I'm just skipping linen
we're now materials which will render
the induction of hypnosis easier or
otherwise enhanced abuse with us
materials and physical methods which
will produce
amnesia for events preceding and during
their use methods of producing shock and
confusion over extended period of time
and capable of ceric to cerous years
substances which will reduce physical
disablement such as paralysis of the
legs acute anemia etc as substance and
visited my favorite go actually
substances which will produce pure
euphoria with no subsequent letdown
and now it goes on in familiar anyone
knows of that substance you want to come
up and talk to me afterwards I'd be
happy to share some of the research but
no again it shows that the CIA is sort
of an erect and one-track way of
thinking about drugs and all encounter
LSD and all of a sudden all these
different things and I just scratched
the surface there and just remember now
it was one document pertaining to one
sub project of one overall program of
which there were several programs so it
gives a sense of how extensive this
which many millions of dollars expended
I'm into this research and it wasn't
just LSD and wasn't just drugs but all
kinds of different behavior control of
mind control techniques were studied by
the CIA and hypnosis electroshock
sensory deprivation anything that
relates to controlling human behavior
and modifying mind the CIA was looking
at it very very intensely but now
getting back to LSD the sea I eventually
did come up with such an operation I
used it for honesty one of those are
just alluded to and that was this idea
that it can be used as a discredited
nature if they can find a way to slip
LSD into a system of a politician in a
third-world country let's say before
they're about to give a speech and then
during the speech of some of them gave
long speeches like Fidel Castro in Cuba
who was targeted in this way but the CIA
never managed to make it work you know
during the middle of the theory was
during the middle of the speech the drug
effect book start to come on and the
person would begin to battle on
ridiculous way and would make a fool of
himself or herself in front of the
followers and would therefore be
disgraced
that's the idea of the discrediting
agent and LSD was used in this way
operationally I did read documents which
had the mains blacked out of who they
were targeting but it's clear that there
were some politicians Africa the CIA was
charging this way when they know that
they wanted to target a gamma Abdul
Nassir the president of Egypt but they
were not able to kind of he but suddenly
we're successful there was another way
the CIA thought about using LSD and that
was as a psychological assessment agent
and I don't know if they ever actually
did this but the idea was that again
they were concerned about if persons
being sent overseas
how easy would be to break them or crack
them Anthony were captured by the enemy
and they had seen that we're LSD it
produced a lot of anxiety and people
that's what they seem to encounter at
the CIA and the question was well if you
give us the person they can handle it
well I think they can handle stressful
situation that made them better suited
to go out on these missions so but the
other way that eventually did use it
operationally CIA now LSD was as an
interrogation agent but wasn't as the
classical truth um constant area where
you give a person a drug and if it
automatically they give you the
information you implicitly what they
found was that if they gave a person's
LSD with a forewarning and the job began
to take effect
awesome humble person wouldn't even know
that they were having these bizarre
hallucinations over it because of a drug
where they know they're in this
situation they've been kept in isolation
and all of them they're starting to go
wacky and then the CIA in Harrogate is
having failed to get information from
the past and so we will keep you in this
crazy flipped out stay forever unless
you tell us what we want to know and the
person doesn't realize that they under
Ellis on the influence of LSD they never
heard of the drug excited hardly anybody
has heard of the drug now in our own mid
fifties and this is it was a little like
a psychological third degree tactic an
instrument of torture and they found
this was a successful way oftentimes to
get people to give information basically
use this as an instrument of torture and
in the similar way the US Army used LSD
as an interrogation agent and they used
it in Vietnam during the Vietnam War to
interrogate the akan court unquote it's
clearly spelled out documents that was
used in this way but the US army also
had another idea of what to do at LSD
and this was even more grandiose than
the CI a-- and that is if they they had
to contend with his idea that if they
display LSD as an aerosol you know over
a city where which was occupied by enemy
troops it would sort of make everybody
in the city of the the occupiers and the
occupied sort of look out go crazy for a
half a day and at that point the US on
that can move in and take over the
cities dislodged vanity with practically
no resistance at all because the enemy
would be incapable of
because in fact this is what the army
found when they gave their own soldiers
in many different places around the
country fort mcclellan Fort Benning Fort
United several places they gave US
soldiers LSD and asked them to perform
military drills and found they couldn't
remark straight and everything was
gained going to a chaotic effect and you
can imagine how it was and they
concluded there's potentially a
tremendous agent of tremendously useful
agents and an offensive weapon as a
cycle of chemical warfare what they call
a jet has been called a madness gift
something that can knock people out of
disabled mo temporarily incapacitate
them but but I wasn't lethal it wouldn't
kill them and this was mean to have
certain advantages in particular
situations which we had to rescue
hostages or the scenario just laid out
of that city being occupied the problem
was that the arming never can get it to
work as an aerosol spray they never
found a way to disseminate LSD as
miracle aerosol and that could be a
stumbling block but it gave the army the
idea to pursue the scenarios so once
again LSD active catalyst and the army
did develop drug super hallucinogens
more powerful the nasty that were they
were able to disseminate in aerosol form
and one particular drug that the years
in this way was called bzees and it was
very powerful drug wear of LSD last
about 12 hours or so busy on the whole
general arrest about three days
with side effects after six weeks unlike
LSD with these minato and you have
visual hallucinations but auditory
hallucinations you see things that
aren't there you don't see things that
are there and again this is different
from LSD where even though things are
different than them hallucinations are
can be very vivid it's not like your
attitude you know if it's at revisit
truly might look different than
ordinarily it's not like you're not
seeing the tree that will or seeing a
tree that agent you know what's even
more bizarre type of hallucinogen is
easy and the army developed it into one
of its seven standardized chemical
warfare agents and by standardized I
mean it went through all the preclinical
and clinical testing and then was
actually turned into weapons so that
they
the with BZ and because the minute hand
grenades cluster bombs different ways of
disseminating BZ and they actually used
BZ 8 on a limited basis in Vietnam so
the blast be in tunnels were enemy was
hiding out in some foreign soil
the problem of being and in real time
situation it could be lurking in the
open air context to control you know
which way the wind blows you know and it
also turns out I mean if your sperm
you're trying to get the enemy and then
the wind shift you going to get your own
people and that eliminates usefulness
also be the BZ it was lethal and in you
know where the doses level reach a
certain point it could actually kill
somebody which is also limited its
usefulness as a non-lethal impacted but
they did develop it into one of their
seven standardized and the warfare agent
along with the mustard gas and children
gas and the nerve agents and so forth
stolen well that's what the army was
doing with with how most injuries the
same time the CI and the army were
experimenting with these drugs
particularly during the fifties now I'm
not really going he did have as I'm
referred to earlier a handful of
scientists and psychologists and
psychiatrists were also getting
interested in these substances and
initially the research was focused on
using LSD to study how the mind works to
understand brain processes brain
chemical processes the idea being
released the theory in the early going
was that if you give a normal person LSD
he or she will become temporarily insane
until the drug wore off
so we've seen as something potentially
of great potential use limits for
studying mental illness schizophrenia
because you can almost like an elapsed
and give it to a person and they become
schizophrenic and then the drug way as
well from there back to normal and it
becomes very interested in this our
civil scientists at the same time is
sort of another tangent some researchers
went off on and didn't sir within the
what was called the psychosomatic
madness limiting paradigm
some researchers study look at the drug
in a different way and I largely do it
ironically to a former of
well I shouldn't even say former he was
an intelligent operator named captain al
hubber a very colorful spook US spy who
was the first person to come along and
say no yellow his LSD to study
schizophrenia use LSD to create
visionary experiences to create
religious experience
to help heal people not to study what
you know sickness but actually overcome
it and it just lets out his his story in
the thumbnail sketch he's one of the
most interesting characters I came
across I had I would say the privilege
of meeting shortly before he died when I
was researching NASA dreams you know
that the first Johnny Appleseed of LSD
ten years before Larry Hubbard during
World War Two was sort of like an Oliver
North type of character and that he was
involved in a technically illegal
operation moving weapons getting weapons
from the United States to Britain in
this case during World War two at a time
when the United States was officially
neutral it's not the plot supposed to be
involved with any of the warring parties
Hubbard oversaw an operation while he
was based in Vancouver where they will
take apart planes and ships and moving
the movie stuff across the broader and
then singer from Canada to Britain so it
made it look like was coming to Canada
so in that sense it was close to the
like an Oliver North that's what Oliver
North is dealing with negara Contras and
at night in the nineteen eighties any
weapon student illegally would Congress
didn't allow it and what happens after
the war President Truman gives Hubbard
in his minute a special citation for
having done all that at this point
others already very wealthy man from his
exploits as a uranium entrepreneur in
1951 the same year the CIA begins to
experiment with LSD he is introduced to
LSD on a psychiatrist couch through a
doctor in Great Britain and he claims to
witness during his first LSD trip
his parents making love the sperm
meeting the egg and his own conception
he claims to witness and the needless to
say he thought this is amazing and he
becomes proselytize ER and concei was
very wealthy from his uranium business
and he could fly his own plane he began
to buy up LSD and Other Drugs and
distribute it to people to basically
give it to anyone who was interested
mainly doctors and scientists who wanted
to
explore the the nibbling side of LSD
knocking mind-control so I thought the
mind-expanding side this is really what
huh burgers into its kind of erotic in
his roots having worked with the LSS and
still you know during this period wasn't
working with the CIA but he was had a
relation to various intelligence
agencies and in the US and and military
uh companies who we're doing a contract
research from the US government so forth
claims to know have known Jake Hoover
head of the FBI I personally tried to
turn him Veronica wing go for it but one
of the people that Hubbard did get LSD
to I just a few of them one of them was
Aldous Huxley the great novelist wrote
brave new world and wrote some of the
most impressive descriptions of the
hallucinogenic drug experience the doors
of perception heaven and hell other was
the first one to give him LSD and
Hubbard also gave LSD to a good friend
of Huxley's man named dr. Humphrey Osman
who was a researcher in Canada
psychiatrist and he ended according the
word psychedelic because what Hubbard
and Huxley Hobbes himself was that the
description of LSD as a psycho telematic
madness mimine agent was very narrow and
it didn't accomplish or didn't
adequately describe what the drug was so
Aslan came up with the phrase
psychedelic and that actually is a
rather neutral term again this is many
years before a psychedelic became
popular among you know in counter
cultural lingo but literally translated
in the mind manifested can make manifest
psychedelic what is in the mind or to
make what is unconscious conscious or to
bring things to the surface of the mind
and that notion of making manifests
what's in the mind to the lent itself
very well to therapy because that's the
therapy is all about making the
unconscious conscious coming to terms
with complexes your repressed material
but with normal therapy it takes a long
time to do this on the psychiatrist
cotton with LSD would like you give a
person's the drug you know as you're a
therapist and it seems like in in one
way you
more insightful experience if it was
managed well then it would you know from
you as a therapy this is what doctors
seem to be finding and they became very
excited about the drug in this context
as a therapeutic ethera P and it was
more than a thousand scientific papers
written on the slip on very seriously in
this way it was seen as having a
possible benefit for alcoholics and for
many different contexts and also in
terms of therapeutic role of years in
fact that became all the rage at one
point in the late 50s in the Hollywood
or people like Cary Grant and Jack
Nicholson and many different actors and
actresses were started to take it and
began to get some publicity in this way
it was still you know at a time when LSD
had none of the negative baggage
associated with it that came when
Timothy Leary started to use the drug
and experiment with it in the 1960s so
whereas the psychiatrist in the fifties
saw as something that he can use to heal
the mind Leary came along and said no
you can use it to heal society Jarrell
for a sick society he sort of projected
its possibilities on a mass social scale
and you know this is now we're getting
into territory probably more familiar
with he became obviously as we know that
the Pied Piper of LSD and he through his
efforts it became widely publicized
attracted a lot of media attention and
it also generated a rather significant
backlash where as a result of some of
his escapades and just because let's
need to give a tenor of the time there
was a backlash particularly in the media
well will Swift and negative things were
being said about LSD by establishment
area are said by guardians of the
establishment and at the time when was
propaganda barrage is being turned out
and the scare stories were going around
claiming that you know you know pregnant
a woman who got pregnant she had taken
LSD any time in her life would give
birth collecting octopus or something
and at the same time stories of this
will be going around we was saying you
know one grouse and you see God and it
was like this very polarized exaggerated
discussion in the media about what LSD
was and it made people very interested
in curious obviously and ended up
generating a greater usage come to the
1960s in terms of understanding the
impact of LSD and what a what a theater
in terms of the student movements and
the counterculture Manu lastima the
overall belying that happened in the
1960 this is an interesting area get
into and nasty dreams and look after
carefully about seconding of the book
you know yield by year looks at sort of
traces what happened with the drug but
you know sort of bring it home in a
nutshell you know as an historian and I
think calles T is very useful if you
accept the definition as I do as the
psychiatrist is using it for therapeutic
agent and basically the definition of
LSD was and it was a nonspecific
amplifier of psychic processes meaning
without fear Isildur amplify what within
the mind conscious or unconscious
weather and that might be scary or
difficult things are not be very
pleasant or pleasurable things without
fear of failure would sort of bring this
up in a nonspecific way and I thought
that's a pretty good definition the only
limitation is that you know what's going
on and when psyche is not unconnected
from what's going on in the larger
social landscape the psychic fabric and
the social fabric intersect so if you
are amplifying such processes you're
also amplifying social prophecies and if
we're LSD does then in concentrated
areas of use is amplify social processes
as well in a nonspecific way I've been
storing it's like sort of an intrical
through we can sort of run it over like
the moment that the magnifying glass
becomes where is it being used and what
is it amplifying in these areas on this
period so I start know from from 1965
and February when the first large-scale
amount of LSD was coming out on the
street again be using the street drug it
was a little bit around before that but
and if February 6th Assad's crucial
moment because that's when the Vietnam
War starts in a big way for the United
States
a bombing campaign against so happens
just at the same comedy hosts Easter for
flooding certain avant-garde communities
or student communities hit Ashbury
Berkeley Madison Ann Arbor New York City
and so forth the obvious places first
begin to being used in a significant way
among students and young people and
others grow in areas where there is also
a lot of political actors so what my my
thesis was and what would a she mean is
that LSD will sort of read things up and
amplify sort of whatever the
constellation of historical social
forces is at that moment which in 1965
was a very optimistic time for people
involved in that movement civil rights
movement had gained a lot of headway and
achieve some success you had in office
vibrant mohini and scene you have the
anti-war movement really picking up
steam in response to what was happening
in Vietnam and basically was a very
optimistic moment among people who felt
you know that they put their feet down
in history they could change history
they could change the world that was we
can look back on and say well maybe
people NIU needs to some degree but
indeed that was the feeling of the
moment my feeling like the general says
that LSD is sort of amplifying that in a
general sense of course things change
very quickly in the 60s and what happens
in 1965 and what's going on is rather
different from what's happening at the
end of the decade 1969 1970 that was the
Beatles song take us to that song and
make it better or whether an LSD is
going to be amplifying decks and saw and
that the sense of things go you know
coming apart and this kind of
revolutionary craziness of like The
Weather Underground or you know the real
extreme militancy that has really no
connection is reality that we're going
to pick up the gun and the and the state
will spur on this kind of clay Yeti or
the webinar very heavily into LSD during
this period when they were going under
well you know they were and you know get
it mowed the college budgets for them
but in the overall sense it's going to
magnify a much more difficult moment
where things on arrival
moon was coming unglued CIA the FBI are
sort of in the air stoking up dissent
and attentions with in their various
factions and there's the Cohen tell
program targeting the new left the Black
Power movement silver and so on to
destroy these movements and we have
right there usability is going to just
amplify that what we might call a bummer
and a question is the expense that LSD
amplifies the bummer and that's
something that the CIA would have a role
in in terms of ease of the LSD there's
an obvious question one can ask himself
with the CIA somehow behind this after
all they were into the drug czar early
on wouldn't they make it what was going
on in the sixties i or stew the question
is not only could they anticipate what
the impact of LSD for in terms of the
mass usually usage but learning evidence
linking CIA connection personnel to the
drug trade and I think a similar kind of
scenario is seen with the knock arrival
Contras and and in fact is long or not
many many different precedents for this
again it's something instructive here
it's not the ideal I miss someone
suggested the CIA sought around the
popular than well how can we get drugs
into the ghetto in the United States
let's support the Contras because
they'll bring Coconino I think it
happened what happened is through I keep
them objected to support at clandestine
army or soak Oakland economic to achieve
a certain pilot foreign policy objective
and it still happens at these people
also raising money in their life through
the drug trade and a CIA knows this and
that's just one of those things they
know that the impact of this will give a
commune I face will be but that's not
why they do it they do it because they
want to have certain impact in Central
American politics and the other thing
that's sort of like collateral damage if
you will which they know about which
they're in part responsible for but it's
different from saying to see I've
thought it all up and planning to do it
that way which you sort of cilia need to
strongly on for people in the press to
knock out I don't think the CIA would
have ever schemed up an idea of you're
dumping losses LSD out on the street a
because I don't think they taught us
something that you can control there
very easily they realized it was very
difficult control the effect in the
field not that's literally their use of
it in the operational context see is
like sort of please on the door CIA
interrupts they just go together Jason
now drug traffickers they go together
I wasn't going scenario like that is
plausible because I don't think to sum
up but see I could have really
understood what the math impact of LSD
would be they in the early going we're
trying to understand what its impact
would be they were commissioning in the
1960s now once there's like the service
of apprentice first there's apprentice
the drug got out of the laboratory and
becomes the mask you know massively used
I think would have shocked the CIA drug
the big girl was like a threat to
national security or as a weapon
people would willingly take with
something that I think would sort of
square with their mentality you know or
their understanding about the drug but
lo and behold here it is it's all
happening so they started commissioning
these studies at think tanks such as the
RAND Corporation SSRI Central Research
Hudson Institute oil these think tanks
were looking at the impact of LSD on the
new left and the counterculture about
the Matthews would impact in the massive
years would be and they were asking
questions for example Iraq and Iran
corporation was asking questions like if
you gave LSD to a person who was
politically engaged in active weather on
the right or left
would it make them drop out of politics
but seemed to me that shows that
understand with drugged us it really
betrayed the lack of understanding the
global economies they're interested but
they don't get it you know because again
look at the Weather Underground
they only totally nuts in their politics
when were they were taking LSD the more
crazy they were getting with their
politics didn't they can drop out of
politics I made a more deeper in
anything and again if it's a nonspecific
amplifier or less I'm not if you're
politically engaged and you took our
feed state politically engaged if you'd
have a little bit of different take or a
more colorful way of demonstrating
recently but it wouldn't change you
radically in that sense unless there was
something you know in you that was
really going in that direction and I
think in the end what the CIA and
mistakes they made comes to tell us it
was something very similar to what a lot
of people in
did with respect to Isis they all made
the same mistake all that very excited
about the drug or there is this people
like Leary or people in the CIA army it
also always going to great things for
their own claws and their own purposes
the Oilers can be the key to the big
breakthrough and never the instance
itself short and I think it was because
they all made this mistake that they
ascribe to the drug and with the drug
has certain inherent properties
qualities that are actually projection
of people's own minds so the CIA
described and defines the drug in their
document as an anxiety producing agent
lie their total coal or paranoid living
the drug the people who need work said
or even they're just related run holy or
doesn't create anxiety overcome you know
makes is a little body producing
engineer whereas there's the stomach you
know and in the 60s we have a civil
rights movement and end up the
nonviolent pacifism love one another and
something fell on and that was sort of a
social ethos and run the whole rescue
becomes the love drug it's a drug that's
going to guaranteed enlighten me
until then so you know as look in brevet
selflessness linger felt enlightening
whether it's don't religious experience
of necessity you have to have that if
you take it and we'll do this thing
again projecting what was in people's
own minds on to the drug or within the
culture and again the psychic in the
social fabric coming year projecting it
onto the drug hood and that's in some
sense there was that that was the LSD
trap that people fell into
that was Martin Lee on the CIA and LSD
acid dreams he spoke in Menlo Park
California Martin Lee is a noted
journalist he's the author of acid
dreams his latest book is the Beast
reawakens this program is produced by
alternative radio an award-winning
independent series broadcasting
nationally and internationally since
1986 if you'd like to place a Visa or
MasterCard order for the program you
just heard Martin Lee on the CIA and LSD
please call the following toll-free
number one eight hundred four four four
1977 again that toll-free number for
Visa or MasterCard orders is one eight
hundred four four four 1977 our email
address is a are at Orci dot-com again
email a are at Orci dot-com or you can
send in your check print your
transcripts or nine dollars even
cassettes are twelve plus a dollar for
postage the address a our p o-- box five
five one boulder colorado
eight zero three zero six again printed
transcripts or nine dollars even
cassettes to twelve plus a dollar for
postage the address a our p o-- box five
five one boulder colorado
eight zero three zero six Charles R in
recorded the program I'm David Barr saw
me on thank you for listening
[Music]